**Determining breast cancer-associated metabolites using chemical similarity enrichment and pathway analysis**

Breast cancer was the most clinically diagnosed cancer in the world in 2018, and has the highest reported incidence among Filipino women in 2020. Early detection and timely treatment are crucial for breast cancer survival. Several studies have reported blood-based metabolomic profiling as a promising diagnostic method for breast cancer due to its high sensitivity to metabolic alterations during cancer stage progression. By analyzing the relationship between the metabolite profiles and the disease, key metabolic signatures and pathways associated with breast cancer may be identified. In this study, the metabolite-breast cancer associations were investigated through the ChemRICH approach, which relies on the chemical structure similarity, ontologies, and properties of the metabolites. Plasma and serum metabolic profiles of Breast Cancer and healthy control samples from a previously published study were analyzed using the ChemRICH set enrichment analysis which identified 38 significantly enriched metabolic clusters (p-value < 0.05), 16 of which were significantly increased (increased ratio > 0.49) and 12 were significantly decreased (increased ratio < 0.29), while the remaining 10 were found to have no significant alterations. Moreover, a key compound for each of these clusters were identified, wherein 18 metabolites were mapped into a network of 16 pathways using Metscape. Analysis of these pathways revealed that 2-hydroxybutyric acid, and glucose are positively associated with Breast Cancer, while alpha-ketoglutarate, pyruvate, sarcosine, cortisol, quinic acid, and cytidine are negatively associated. 
These findings support the occurrence of the Warburg Effect in cancer cells as well as other inhibitory mechanisms that promotes tumorigenesis. These 8 metabolic signatures are potential Breast Cancer biomarkers which can be utilized for its diagnosis. Analysis on the accuracy, sensitivity, and specificity of these metabolite markers is recommended to measure their performance in predicting cancer status for further validation. 

*Santos Jennifer R | Under the mentorship of Dr. Nina Rosario Rojas and Dr. Armando de Jesus Jr.*